# Collaboration samples dev documentation

The main component of the samples maintenance are various scripts streamlining the whole process. Scripts are located in the `_scripts` directory.

Most of the scripts does not require `ckeditor5*` repositories, however [`_scripts/build.js`](#build) depends (internally) on `ckeditor5` package utils. Thus, the suggested directory structure on your file system looks like on the following snippet:

```
workspace/
├── ckeditor5
└── ckeditor5-collaboration-samples
```

## Table of contents

- [Dependencies management](#dependencies-management)
    - [check-dependencies](#check-dependencies) script
    - [update-dependencies](#update-dependencies) script
- [Building](#building)
    - [build](#build) script
    - [build-local](#build-local) script
- [Releasing](#releasing)
    - [release](#release) script

## Dependencies management

There are 2 scripts dedicated to help with dependencies management.

### check-dependencies

This script checks all samples dependencies, whether:

- All dependencies are used,
- All dependencies are up-to-date.

If there are any unused or outdated dependencies, the script will output a list of such for each sample.

It can be run with:

```bash
pnpm run samples:check-dependencies
```

And accepts following flags:

- `--verbose` (`-v`) - adds more logging,
- `--sample` (`-s`) - checks only given sample (full name needs to be passed).

> Internally, this script uses [`depcheck`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/depcheck) and [`pnpm outdated --depth Infinity`](https://pnpm.io/cli/outdated).

**IMPORTANT**: The `depcheck` library does not work perfectly with Angular and so it may complain about unused deps which are in fact needed. This false positive usually looks as below:
```
Executed command: pnpm dlx depcheck

Unused dependencies
* @angular/compiler
* @angular/forms
* zone.js
Unused devDependencies
* @angular-devkit/build-angular
* @angular/cli
* @angular/compiler-cli
* typescript
```

### update-dependencies

This script updates samples dependencies. It allows for:

- Updating all dependencies.
- Updating only CKEditor 5 dependencies (`ckeditor5`, `ckeditor5-premium-features` and integrations packages).

It can be run with:

```bash
pnpm run samples:update-dependencies
```

And accepts following flags:

- `--verbose` (`-v`) - adds more logging,
- `--sample` (`-s`) - updates only given sample,
- `--commit` (`-c`) - commits all changes generated by the script,
- `--ckeditor-only` - updates only CKEditor 5 related dependencies.

> **ProTip**: This script (with `--ckeditor-only` flag) is run by [release script](#release), so it does not have to be run separately in normal circumstances.

## Building

There are 2 scripts dedicated for samples building. The main goal is to allow smoother development, easier testing of multiple samples and use as a part of the CI check.

Building is no longer used as a part of the release process as before. Only sources are published.

### build

This scripts builds all samples in a separate directory. The end result is a directory with only build outputs for each sample (no source files).

It requires `ckeditor5` package, so one should follow suggested directory structure mentioned on the beginning of this document, or use `--ckeditor5-path` CLI argument to pass the custom localization.

```bash
pnpm run samples:build --ckeditor5-path /home/user/workspace/ckeditor/ckeditor5
```

This script can be run with:

```bash
pnpm run samples:build
```

And accepts following flags:

- `--verbose` (`-v`) - adds more logging,
- `--sample` (`-s`) - builds only given sample,
- `--dev` (`-d`) - installs latest nightly versions of CKEditor 5 packages from npm instead of using the ones from samples' `package.json` file,
- `--concurrency` (`-c`) - defines how many samples will be build concurrently,
- `--keep` (`-k`) - indicates whether the release directory should not be removed before starting the build,
- `--ckeditor5-path` - defines a path to the `ckeditor/ckeditor5` repository.

The building script always call the `pnpm install` command. Passing the `--dev` option uses latest nightly versions of CKEditor 5 packages.

It generates build in the `build/release-collaboration-samples/` directory. After that, one can easily run all samples at once with:

```bash
cd build/release-collaboration-samples/ && http-server
```

### build-local

This scripts runs build process for each sample separately. It is like doing `cd sample_dir && pnpm install && pnpm run build` for all samples at once.

It can be run with:

```bash
pnpm run samples:build-local
```

And accepts following flags:

- `--verbose` (`-v`) - adds more logging,
- `--sample` (`-s`) - builds only given sample,
- `--concurrency` (`-c`) - defines how many samples will be build concurrently.

## Releasing
 
The release process involves mostly updating `ckeditor5*` dependencies in all samples and pushing it to the remote. No build artifacts should be published as a part of it (as it was in the past).

The entire release process involves following steps:

1. Creating a tag for current version (where tag name is `v{CURRENT_CKEDITOR5_DEP_VERSION}`).
2. Updating `ckeditor5*` dependencies for all samples on `master` branch.
3. Pushing the tag and `master` to the remote.

There is a dedicated [release script](#release) to streamline the whole process, which covers 1st and 2nd step described above.

Before starting the release, make sure that:

1. The `ckeditor5`, `ckeditor5-premium-features` and/or integration packages have been released (check `npm`).
2. You are on the `master` branch with latest changes and no local modifications.

After that you can proceed with the release using `release` script as described in the [section below](#release).

As a post-release actions, make sure to:

1. Notify on `#cke5-release` that the release has been done: "Collaboration samples have been released 🎉".

### release

This script helps with the release process, doing most of the work.

It can be run with:

```bash
pnpm run samples:release
```

And accepts following flags:

- `--verbose` (`-v`) - adds more logging.

The result of running the script is a new commit with `ckeditor5*` dependencies updated for all samples and a new git tag.

If there are any local modification, existing git tag with the same name or `ckeditor5*` dependencies not updated, the script will abort.
